# Developing a New Molecular Tool for Detecting Gill Parasites in Mediterranean Fish Species
### Fedor Voitinskii 1,2, Danny Morrick 1,2, Dan Tchernov 1,2.

### The Department of Marine Biology 1, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa,Morris Kahn Marine Station 2

The Mediterranean Sea is a critical source of food and economic stability, with commercial fishing and aquaculture playing vital roles. However, the health of these fish populations is increasingly threatened by parasites and bacterial pathogens, which can cause severe disease outbreaks. This research aims to develop a novel, cost-effective molecular tool for detecting gill parasites in Mediterranean fish species, addressing a critical gap in current fish health management practices. By utilizing bi-annual fish sampling data collected by the Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research Institute (IOLR) from 2018 to 2024, we will extract and sequence DNA from gill samples of various Mediterranean fish species to identify prevalent parasite and bacterial pathogen species. After sequencing this data, we will use it to design specific primers to create a PCR-based detection method that is both affordable and easy to use. Our approach will include pooling gill samples to reduce costs while maintaining detection sensitivity. This study will analyze temporal trends in parasite prevalence and correlate these trends with data received and analyzed in previous years by other members of the Morris Kahn Marine Research station, as well as other colleagues in the field. Our goal is to provide a reliable monitoring tool that will enhance early parasite detection, improve fish health management, and support the sustainability of commercial fishing and aquaculture in the Mediterranean. These findings will also contribute to food security and human health by reducing the incidence of parasite-related fish diseases. Preliminary results so far are an extensive set of samples and DNA from 5 years, ready to be analyzed with various bioinformatics methods. Through this research, we aim to deliver practical solutions that integrate molecular biology techniques with environmental data analysis, ultimately fostering a better understanding of disease dynamics in Mediterranean fish populations.